9.
Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have been worked
up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows
and deprives the soul both of hope and fear. Justine died, she rested, and I was alive.
The blood flowed freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my heart which
nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes. I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had committed
deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much more, I persuaded myself, was yet
yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue. I had begun life with benevolent
intentions and thirsted for the moment when I should put them in practice and make myself
useful to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted. Instead of that serenity of conscience which
allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction and from thence to gather
promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt which hurried me away to a
hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. This state of mind preyed upon my health
which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the
face of man. All sound of joy or complacency was tortured to me. Solitude was my only consolation,
deep, dark, death-like solitude. My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible
in my disposition and habits, and endeavored by arguments deduced from the feelings of his
serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and awaken in me the courage
to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me. Do you think, Victor, said he, that I do not suffer
also? No one could love a child more than I loved your brother. Tears came into his eyes as he spoke.
But is it not a duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness?
By an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow
prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness without which no
man is fit for society. This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case. I
should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if remorse had not mingled its
bitterness and terror its alarm with my other sensations. Now I could only answer my father
with a look of despair and endeavor to hide myself from his view. About this time we retired to our
house at Belle Reve. This change was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates
regularly at ten o'clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that hour had rendered
our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. I was now free. Often after the
rest of the family had retired for the night I took the boat and passed many hours upon the water.
Sometimes with my sail set I was carried by the wind and sometimes after rowing it into the middle
of the lake I left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections.
I was often tempted when all was at peace around me and I the only unquiet thing that
wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly. If I accept some bat or the
frogs whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the shore. Often
I say I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake that the waters might close over me and
my calamities forever. But I was restrained when I thought of the heroic and suffering
Elizabeth whom I tenderly loved and whose existence was bound up in mine. I thought
also of my father and surviving brother should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and
unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose among them. At these moments I
wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my mind only that I might afford them consolation
and happiness but that could not be. Remorse extinguished every hope. I had been the author
of unalterable evils and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had created should
perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure feeling that all was not over and that he would
still commit some signal crime which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection
of the past. There was always scope for fear so long as anything I loved remained behind.
My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes
became inflamed and I ardently wished to extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed.
When I reflected on his crimes and malice my hatred and revenge burst all bounds of
I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes could I when there have
precipitated him to their base. I wished to see him again that I might wreak the utmost extent
of abhorrence on his head and avenge the deaths of William and Justine. Our house was the house
of mourning. My father's health was deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was
sad and desponding. She no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations. All pleasure seemed to
her sacrilege toward the dead. Eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she
should pay to innocents so blasted and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature who in
earlier youth wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future
prospects. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her and
its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles. When I reflect my dear cousin said she, on the
miserable death of Justine Moritz I no longer see the world and its works as they before appeared
to me. Before I looked upon the accounts of vice and injustice that I read in books or heard from
others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils. At least they were remote and more familiar to
the imagination. But now misery has come home and men appear to me as monsters thirsting for
each other's blood. Yet I am certainly unjust. Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty
and if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered assuredly she would have been
the most apraved of human creatures. For the sake of a few jewels to have murdered the son of her
benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth and appeared to love as it had been
her own? I could not consent to the death of any human being but certainly I should have thought
such a creature unfit to remain in the society of men. But she was innocent. I know, I feel,
she was innocent. You are of the same opinion and that confirms me. Alas! Victor, when falsehood can
look so like the truth, who can assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel as if I were walking
on the edge of a precipice towards which thousands are crowding and endeavoring to plunge me into the
William and Justine were assassinated and the murderer escapes. He walks about the world free
and perhaps respected. But even if I were condemned to suffer on the scaffold for the same crimes,
I would not change places with such a wretch. I listened to this discourse with the extremist
agony. I, not indeed, but in effect, was the true murderer. Elizabeth read my anguish in my
countenance and, kindly taking my hand, said, My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These
events have affected me, God knows how deeply, but I am not so wretched as you are. There is an
expression of despair and sometimes of revenge in your countenance that makes me tremble. Dear
Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the friends around you who center all their hopes in
you. Have we lost the power of rendering you happy? Ah, while we love, while we are true to
each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native country, we may reap every
tranquil blessing. What can disturb our peace? And could not such words from her whom I fondly
prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my heart?
Even as she spoke I drew near to her as if in terror lest at that very moment the destroyer
had been near to rob me of her. Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth,
nor of heaven could redeem my soul from woe. The very accents of love were ineffectual. I
was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial influence could penetrate. The wounded deer
dragging its fainting limbs to some untrodden break there to gaze upon the arrow which had
pierced it and to die was but a type of me. Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair
that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily
exercise and by change of place, some relief for my intolerable sensations. It was during an access
of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near alpine valleys,
sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral because
human sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamonix. I had visited
it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had passed since then. I was a wreck, but not had
changed in those savage and enduring scenes. I performed the first part of my journey on horseback.
I afterwards hired a mule as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive injury on these rugged
roads. The weather was fine. It was about the middle of the month of August, nearly two months
after the death of Justine, that miserable epoch from which I dated all my woe. The weight upon my
spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in the ravine of Arves. The immense mountains
and precipices that overhung me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks,
and the dashing of the waterfalls around, spoke of a power mighty as omnipotence. And I ceased to
hear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements,
here displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed
a more magnificent and astonishing character. Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of
piney mountains, the impetuous arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from among the
trees formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty
Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all as belonging to another earth,
the habitations of another race of beings. I passed the bridge of Polissier, where the ravine,
which the river forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend the mountain that overhangs it.
Soon after, I entered the valley of Chamonix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime,
but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of Servox, through which I had just passed.
The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw no more ruined castles
and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the road. I heard the rumbling thunder of the
marked the smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc, raised
itself from the surrounding aghiles, and its tremendous dome overlooked the valley.
A tingling, long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this journey. Some turn in the
road, some new object suddenly perceived and recognized reminded me of days gone by and were
associated with the light-hearted gaiety of boyhood. The very winds whispered in soothing
accents, and maternal nature bade me weep no more. Then again the kindly influence ceased
to act. I found myself fettered again to grief and indulging in all the misery of reflection.
Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all
myself. Or, in a more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on the grass,
weighed down by horror and despair. At length I arrived to the village of Chamonix. Exhaustion
succeeded to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had endured. For a short space of
time I remained at the window, watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Blanc,
and listening to the rushing of the arve which pursued its noisy way beneath. The same lulling
sounds acted as a lullaby to my two keen sensations. When I placed my head upon my pillow,
sleep crept over me. I felt it as it came and blessed the giver of oblivion.